---
layout:     post   				    # 使用的布局（不需要改）
title:      一道静电场题目的回答   	# 标题 
subtitle:   转自PSE个人回答			# 副标题
editdate:	2021-05-02				# 编辑时间
date:       2021-05-02 				# 时间
author:     DavidWang19 			# 作者
catalog: true 						# 是否归档
tags:								# 标签
    - PSE
    - 物理
    - 电磁学
    - 静电场
---

{:j:.Z .language-js}
{:css:.Z .language-css}
{:b:.Z .language-bash}

# 问题描述

### How one concludes that Gauss law is valid here or not and line integral of $E$ is zero without using curl?  *(Asked by WizardMath)*

I encountered this problem while considering option (b) below. I took the curl and found to be zero, but is there some more elegant way to show that (b) is correct? Also, for option (c), I can make the conclusion for the spherical case, but not for other cases. Can anyone tell how to validate/invalidate Gauss' law in other cases?

> In another world, instead of the Coulomb's law, electric force $\vec{F}$ on a point like charge $q$ due to another point like charge $Q$ is found to obey the following law.
> $$\vec{F} = \frac{Qq\left(1-\sqrt{\alpha r}\right)}{4\pi\varepsilon_0 r^3}\hat{r}$$
> Here $\alpha$ is a positive constant and $\vec{r}$ is the position vector of charge $q$ relative to the chrage $Q$.
>
> (a) Electric field due to a point charge $Q$ is $\vec{E} = \frac{Q\left(1-\sqrt{\alpha r}\right)}{4\pi\varepsilon_0 r^3}\hat{r}$
>
> (b) Line integral of this electric field $\oint\vec{E}\cdot\textrm{d}\vec{l}$ over a closed path is also zero as in our world.
>
> (c) Gauss' law $\oint \vec{E}\cdot\textrm{d}\vec{s} = \frac{q_{enclosed}}{\varepsilon_0}$ also holds true for this electric field.
>
> (d) All the above statements are true but this electric field is not conservative.

# 个人主回答

For option (b), the correctness of this equation is equivalent to whether the force is a conservative force, or whether the new field is a conservative field. We can see that the direction of the force is determined by $\hat{r}$ (which means the force is a repulsive force) and the magnitude of the new force is determined by $Q,q$ and $r$ (both $\sqrt{r}$ and $r^3$ can only determine the magnitude, but not the direction), so we can easily discover that the word done by this force is irrelative to the route, so the option (b) is correct.

For option (c), we can do some deduction
$$
d\phi=\vec{E}\cdot d\vec{S}=\frac{Q(1-\sqrt{\alpha r})}{4\pi\epsilon_0r^3}dS\cos{\theta}
$$
Then due to the property of solid angle, $d\Omega=\frac{dS_\perp}{r^2}=\frac{dS\cos{\theta}}{r^2}$, we have
$$
d\phi=\frac{Q(1-\sqrt{\alpha r})}{4\pi\epsilon_0 r}d\Omega
$$
Then we use the another property of solid angle, a closed surface's solid angle to a point inside it is $4\pi$, we have
$$
\oint\vec{E}\cdot d\vec{S}=\oint d\phi=\oint \frac{Q(1-\sqrt{\alpha r})}{4\pi\epsilon_0 r}d\Omega
$$
If option (c) is correct, we can find that $\frac{1-\sqrt{\alpha r}}{r}=1$, that can not be satisfied. So option (c) is not correct.

Hope that will be helpful.

# 评论区讨论

**Q**: Still one thing Sir part B i didnt get from u r saying that force is only a functiom of $Q$ $r$ and $q$, how does that imply B is correct. For C r u considering a spherical charge distribution not ig anytype of shape ?

**A**: For option (b), we should prove that the work done by the force is irrelative to the route the object moves. We can discover that the magnitude of force is determined by the object's absolute position. That means when you are calculating the work, you needn't consider the relative displacement (such as the friction force, that is a non-conservative force), you can simply do the integration and use the basic law of integration to calculate (that means the work done is determined by the start and end point).

**A**: If you want a more general and theoretical explanation for option (b), there is. The necessary and sufficient condition of a force being a conservative force is $\nabla \times \vec{F}=0$, you can do this calculation to prove option (b). This is the method parsa639 offering, you can refer to his answer.

**A**: For option (c), I give the situation of a point charge. However, for a charge in all shapes, you can simply do an integration, which means consider it a combination of considerable point charges. Then you will see the conclusion remains the same.

# 个人赞同的回答

###Written by parsa639

We can calculate curl and divergence of the given field to show that statements (c) and (d) are not true:
$$
	\nabla \times \vec{E} = \frac{q}{4 \pi \epsilon_0} \nabla \times (\frac{1-\sqrt{\alpha r}}{r^3} \hat{r}) = 0
$$
$$
	\nabla \cdot \vec{E} = \frac{q}{4 \pi \epsilon_0} \nabla \cdot (\frac{1-\sqrt{\alpha r}}{r^3} \hat{r}) = \frac{q}{4 \pi \epsilon_0 r^4} (\frac 12 \sqrt{\alpha r} -1 )
$$
so we can conclude that Gauss's law doesn't hold true here and that this field is conservative.
As a hint I want to say that if Gauss's law held here it should have had this form:
$$
\nabla \cdot \vec{E} = \frac {\rho}{\alpha \epsilon_0}
$$
due to dimensional constraints.

# 附录

PSE大家应该都知道是啥，不知道的请看这里：[Physics Stack Exchange](https://physics.stackexchange.com/)

PSE原问题地址：[electrostatics - How one concludes that Gauss law is valid here or not and line integral of $E$ is zero without using curl? - Physics Stack Exchange](https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/623843/how-one-concludes-that-gauss-law-is-valid-here-or-not-and-line-integral-of-e-i/623854#623854)

这算是我在PSE上答的第一个问题，十分有纪念意义。之后我每次在PSE上答的有意义的题目一般都会搬到这边来，如果发现好问题也会搬过来，都会放在PSE这个tag里，如有需要可以查阅。